>>JAY DYER: Is there a
hidden, more esoteric,
deeper meaning to
the Hollywood films
that we all love to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>JAY WEIDNER: And
I'm Jay Weidner,
and this is "Hollywood Decoded."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>DYER: "Twin Peaks" is
America in microcosm.
It's David Lynch's attempt
at combining satire and soap
opera to picture both the
dark and the light side
of the American experience.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah,
this is a real drill
down into the early
1990s America,
where everything was hidden.
No one was talking about it.
In some ways, it was shocking
to America at the time.
>>DYER: Yeah, you would
never see something
like this on mainstream
TV again nowadays.
But what's interesting is
that Lynch has combined things
that we wouldn't think
could be combined.
He's taken, again, noir,
neo-noir influence.
He's combining that
with the satire
of the American experience.
And he's also throwing
in soap opera.
A lot of people don't realize
that the draw of this show
is that it's
mocking soap operas.
>>WEIDNER: Yes, it is.
>>DYER: But he's saying America
is kind of a soap opera,
but he's also going to
reveal a lot of truth
about how things really
work in the real world.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
And the whole film is really
talking about duality.
That's why it's
called "Twin Peaks."
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: It's about
everything has its opposite.
Everything has a doppelganger.
Everything is in a
mirror to each other,
and even all the way to the
very last shot of the series,
where the villain
is in the mirror,
and DB Cooper's been taken
over by that villain.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: The whole
thing is about this kind
of mirrored world.
In other words,
there is an America
which is being presented at the
time of all goodness and light,
and then there's
the America as being
presented in "Twin Peaks,"
which is probably more truthful.
>>DYER: Exactly.
And Lynch loves to do that.
He loves to combine the serene
American pie with something
almost Southern
Gothic, something
like you'd see in
Flannery O'Connor, where
in "Blue Velvet,"
you're watering the lawn
and you find an ear, you know?
Or "Wild at Heart,"
it's this radical tale
of American revolution,
where Nicolas Cage and Laura
Dern are on the run from
traditional morality
and so forth.
But what we want to look at
here in this first clip is going
to set the tone,
I think, for what
we're dealing with on
many levels, many planes.
And as we've said, Lynch
loves to discuss shamanism.
He loves to discuss the idea
of there being other worlds.
He says this in
many interviews, he
believes that there's
other planes of existence.
This is all going to be
woven into the script, woven
into the story of "Twin Peaks,"
where we have this Black
Lodge and this White Lodge.
So next we're going to look at
the problem that Cooper has.
And he's trying to
solve this murder
of Laura Palmer in this bizarre
backwoods town of Twin Peaks.
And he's having
these dreams, right?
He uses this Buddhist
technique of free association,
and what we might call
twilight language to try to--
through synchronicity-- piece
together who the killer is.
And he's been whispered in
a dream who the killer is,
but he can't remember.
So let's watch that.
>> Following a dream
I had three years ago,
I have become deeply moved
by the plight of the Tibetan
people, and filled with
a desire to help them.
I also awoke from the
same dream realizing
that I had subconsciously
gained knowledge
of a deductive
technique involving
mind-body coordination operating
hand in hand with the deepest
level of intuition.
Sheriff, Deputy Hawk, if
you will please assist me,
I will now demonstrate.
>>DYER: So Cooper knows through
his Tibetan Buddhist philosophy
that there is a plane
that you can access.
And this kind of recalls maybe,
Sherlock Holmes and opium.
Not through drugs,
but through an altered
state of consciousness,
that maybe he
can solve crimes through
the psycho-sphere, right?
And so he gets this
idea that through the
dreams that he's
having maybe he's
actually speaking to the spirit
of the deceased Laura Palmer.
She appears to be maybe trapped
in this Black Lodge, which
is a kind of prison house in
the next level of existence
in the spiritual
realm or so forth.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, he's definitely
using a lot of Tibetan Buddhist
themes, the way he meditates.
He openly tells people
that he's pursuing
this kind of spiritual
path, and he's not really
afraid to tell people this.
And he's actually one of the
most interesting characters
in television history, because
he's actually a pretty nice guy
until the very end.
And you're kind of rooting
for him to solve the crime,
but he never does.
>>DYER: Well, and
what Cooper is onto
is the possibility of the
occult in this murder.
Nobody else can even
conceive of that,
they don't think it's possible.
And he knows that if he taps
into that spiritual realm
that he might be able to get a
clue as to who the killer was.
And what's weird is that
throughout the series,
you'll have this
otherworldly presence that
keeps stepping in.
We're going to see giants.
We're going to see owls taking
on a spiritual significance.
We're going to see
midgets stepping into--
>>WEIDNER:
Backward-talking midgets.
>>DYER: Reverse-talking
midgets, right.
And that's all going to
have a specific meaning.
But I mentioned that technique
of solving crimes in a way
that most people wouldn't,
which is a free association
kind of twilight technique.
So I'll explain that when
we look at this clip.
>> I was old, sitting
in a red room.
There was a midget in a red
suit and a beautiful woman.
The little man told me that my
favorite gum was coming back
into style, and
didn't his cousin
look exactly like Laura Palmer?
Which she did.
>> What cousin?
>> The beautiful woman.
She is filled with secrets.
Sometimes her arms bend back.
Where she's from, the
birds sing a pretty song,
and there's always
music in the air.
The midget did a
dance, Laura kissed me,
and she whispered the name
of the killer in my ear.
>> Who was it?
>> I don't remember.
>>DYER: So this is Cooper's
divination technique,
the synchro-mystic
connection to where
he's going to speak a name
to this rock, throw the rock,
and see how close it gets
to breaking the bottles.
And by that, he's going to
divine who might or might not
have killed Laura Palmer.
Now this seems absurd, and
with Lynch's fascination
with surrealism, there is
an acceptance of the absurd.
>>WEIDNER: Right.
>>DYER: The show is partly
comedy, it's dark satire.
>>WEIDNER: Very.
>>DYER: But there's also a sense
in which I think Lynch really
does believe that these
synchro-mystic techniques might
be real.
There might be a
way to decode what's
called twilight
language, that there's
a kind of script that's being
written, maybe by archons,
or angelic forces that are
higher than us, that requires
interpreting not just
this or that event,
but entire events as a
whole, which might involve
the names involved in something,
or the sacred geometry involved
in a site, or where it
is on a parallel, right?
So all of these combine.
What you wrote, for
example, in "King-Kill/33"
with James Shelby Downard--
you have this multiple layers
of decoding an event, right?
Now we mentioned Dave McGowan.
He talked about this as
well with Maury Terry's work
on the zodiac.
And so maybe there is
a twilight language
that we can read by which
we decode ritual events.
And this is what's going
on in "Twin Peaks."
It's a big ritual event.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, and definitely,
Cooper is tapping into that.
I think that David
Lynch probably
had this idea that he was
going to make a detective who
used these powers
that he definitely
has explored in his own life.
And there is a lot
to be said for it.
I mean, you throw the I
Ching, and what you're doing
is you're divining that
moment in which you're
throwing the I Ching.
So it's not about the past
or the future, necessarily.
It's the past and the future
as reflected in that moment,
and that's what he's
doing with these rocks.
He's trying to find his
way through this morass,
and he's using these magical
means to guide his way.
And in fact, he will be
the more successful person
guiding his way through this.
And you can see the faces of the
people he's explaining it to.
They don't understand
him at all.
>>DYER: Right.
They can't conceive of
it being an occult crime,
and operating on
multiple levels.
And that's why Cooper
ultimately does solve the case,
but he ends up going
down the dark side.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
>>DYER: So in the next scene,
we're going to look at the path
to the Black Lodge.
And this really sums
up where we're going.
The series takes a dark turn.
Because although he
solves the initial murder
towards the end of season one
and into two of Laura Palmer,
more murders start
happening, and we find out
that it's his nemesis, sort
of this Moriarty character,
his nemesis, Windom
Earle, who's a former FBI
guy who got into the left-hand
path, as we see here.
>> I found this in
the project archives.
>> These evil sorcerers--
Dugpas, they're
called-- they cultivate
evil for the sake of
evil, nothing else.
They express themselves
in darkness for darkness
without leavening motive.
Now this ardent purity allows
them to access a secret place
where the cultivation
of evil proceeds
in exponential fashion, and with
it, the furtherance of evil's
resulting power.
This place of power is
tangible, and as such,
it can be found, entered,
and perhaps utilized
in some fashion.
The Dugpas have many names
for them, but chief among them
is the Black Lodge.
You don't believe me, don't you?
You think I'm mad, over-worked.
Go away.
>> Gentlemen, when Windom
Earle arrived in Twin Peaks,
I assumed he had come
for vengeance, for me.
But I miscalculated.
He has insinuated himself into
the lives of people I care for.
He has murdered innocents.
He has engaged us in subterfuge
and red herring, a fish
I don't particularly care for.
But all of these acts
are merely camouflage.
He's been after something else
all along, the Black Lodge.
>>DYER: David Lynch is really
interested in VHS tapes
laying around, right?
So here we have the
Project Blue Book
archives that the
major discusses.
And in this archive, he
found that Windom Earle,
the former FBI nemesis
to Agent Cooper--
he was actually involved
in Project Blue Book.
And what he discovered was that
there were these other planes
of existence, and that
this ancient tribe
of shamans, the Dugpas, actually
turned to the dark side.
And they wanted to basically
enact evil for evil's sake,
just total chaos, no
rhyme or reason for it.
And Windom Earle falls
in love with this idea,
and basically goes mad.
And so we realize that
even though it's madness,
there's a method to it, in
that he's doing these ritual
murders for a reason.
He's leaving these
clues for Cooper,
typical serial
killer-type stuff.
But what I think
is most fascinating
is that it's specifically
mentioned in connection
to the UFO phenomenon,
Project Blue Book.
And that in the book
that Mark Frost wrote--
the co-creator
with David Lynch--
it is specifically about JPL
laboratories, L. Ron Hubbard,
and that Crowleyan-type
approach to decoding the spirit
behind "Twin Peaks,"
which is this Black Lodge.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, that's
really interesting,
what he's doing here, and how
it precursors "The X-Files."
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: But it's
very interesting
that he's going
in this direction.
And it must have been quite
jarring to the people watching
the show at the time,
because it's so completely
different from the first half
of the season, where he's now
going off on all
these other things,
and he's connecting UFOs
with cover ups, and rituals,
and murder, and agents gone bad.
And it also should
be said that one
of the things that Crowley
was really trying to do
was to create the apocalypse.
>>DYER: Yes.
>>WEIDNER: He was
influenced greatly
by John Dee, Queen
Elizabeth's court astrologer,
who also had this great love
of this idea of the apocalypse.
And some people think that
the entire British going out
into the world and
conquering the world
was part of this
John Dee apocalypse,
and both Crowley and John Dee
were secret agents, and were--
>>DYER: British intelligence.
>>WEIDNER: British intelligence.
And a lot of people
think that they
were using occult
language as a cover
up for trying to tell the queen
or the royalty what was really
going on.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: It looked
like occult gibberish,
but it actually, it was hey,
they're invading Poland,
and this is going on,
and this is happening.
>>DYER: John Dee was
also the first 007.
>>WEIDNER: And so
I think that Lynch
is exploring that
whole idea, that there
is an powerful occult
group in our military
and in government that
actually wants the apocalypse.
That's what they want.
>>DYER: In the next
clip we're going
to look at, on the
wings of love, which
shows Windom Earle basically
solving the dark side of what
the Black Lodge is,
and basically trying
to open up this portal or gate.
So here what we've
seen is Windom Earle,
the serial killer,
on his hell-bent path
to find the portal
to the Black Lodge.
And he realizes that it has to
do with Native American cave
paintings.
And what's fascinating is that
the Native American religious
mythology has a place
for these giants.
>> (WHISPERING) Yes!
>>DYER: And these giants
come up in the show.
It's actually a
very funny scene.
But the giant is in
part leading Cooper
down his path to solve
where the White Lodge is.
>>WEIDNER: Right.
>>DYER: And what
happens with Earle
is that he realizes that
the White Lodge needs
to be inverted to open up the
gateway to the Black Lodge.
So all the black magic,
all the occult stuff
is based on that
principle of inversion.
So he turns this
little knob, right?
And he flips the little
diamond upside down.
And once again, we see
diamonds, just like in "2001."
Why is it a diamond?
In "Twin Peaks,"
these are planes.
They're squares that
represent planes of existence.
And Lynch explains
this, actually.
So on our plane
of existence, it's
in between the middle
world, between the White
Lodge and the Black Lodge.
>>WEIDNER: Right,
we're in Middle-Earth.
>>DYER: Exactly, and
so Earle is opening
the left-hand path, which
he actually mentions,
to the Black Lodge.
>>WEIDNER: And if you
look at the symbol that
is on the thing
he's turning, it's
two peaks with a square
right in the middle,
again referring back to
the title, and the fact
that there's other
planes of existence.
And then he inverts that.
>>DYER: He inverts it, right.
>>WEIDNER: So he
inverts Twin Peaks.
So that's very interesting.
>>DYER: So we're going to go
into the negative world, right?
The upside down
world, so to speak.
>>WEIDNER: The
upside down world.
>>DYER: And in the
next clip, we're
going to see the path
to the Black Lodge
is directly connected
to ritual magic
once again, the Goetia, and
sigils, and Solomonic magic,
and opening these pathways to
other spirits and so forth.
So let's look at the
path to the Black Lodge.
>> What is it, Coop?
>> Oh, just thinking
about Annie Blackburn.
>> Well, bless your heart,
I've never known your mind
to wander.
>> Ah, Harry, I've been
feeling this way all day.
And I proceed as usual my
mind clear and focused,
and then suddenly out of
nowhere, I see her face
and I hear her voice.
Naturally, I try to
reorient myself, come back
to the task at hand,
but the image remains.
Sometimes I actually feel dizzy.
>>DYER: Now what was
important in the scene
was the symbol that was on
the board right behind Cooper.
>>WEIDNER: Right.
>>DYER: And this is an
actual ritual magic sigil.
So what we know is that
this clues us into the fact
that Windom Earle is
actually practicing Goetia.
He's actually practicing
the invocation
of these dark spirits.
And the reason for that
is because he's actually
possessed by Bob.
>>WEIDNER: By Bob.
>>DYER: Bob is
this demonic power
that's underneath, the
Man From Another Place,
basically, what's identified
as an alien being.
So basically, Bob is
this spiritual slave,
the servant who's actually doing
the killings, from Laura Palmer
all the way into season two.
And he's underneath,
he's a servant
to the Man from Another Place,
the little midget guy, who
is basically a demon, but
also an alien for all intents
and purposes in this series.
So what Earle is doing is
actually the motivation of Bob,
this spirit, who as
we're going to see,
is actually going to offer up
the sacrifice of these people
to the Man From Another Place.
>>WEIDNER: Right.
And of course, Bob is a
very interesting character,
very mysterious in this film.
I believe he's only in about 130
seconds of the entire series,
yet he's the evil force in it.
And it's interesting
that his name
is Bob, which is
spelled forwards
and backwards the same.
>>DYER: A palindrome, right.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah,
it's a palindrome.
And again, one more
of David Lynch's
satiric tricks that he's
using to kind of show America
as it is.
So Bob is the kind
of the everyman
name, Billy Bob in the south.
>>DYER: Right a
common guy, right.
>>WEIDNER: Common guy who's
been turned into a demon.
And eventually, he
will consume even
Agent Cooper, which is
a very interesting idea.
>>DYER: Yeah, Cooper
throughout the series
is on the white side.
And he's always,
in a way, tempted,
and it comes up several
times in the series--
beware of the dark path.
Beware of going down
that route, it's egoism,
it's selfish, right?
And he finally
capitulates to that,
which is so surprising,
because he's
almost morally perfect, right?
He needs an Achilles
heel, almost.
But rather than him having
some small fault or defect,
Lynch actually has to
be completely possessed
by the end of the series.
>>WEIDNER: You watch,
Cooper will be caught
in like a 25-year [INAUDIBLE].
You watch, it'll be
something so crazy, right?
And he won't remember any of it.
Something like that's
going to happen.
>>DYER: Well, I think what we're
going to see in the next clip
is illustrative of
this point of how
things that are happening
in the Black Lodge
are intentionally outside
of time and space,
and they're done in reverse.
And Lynch has said in
interviews that he intentionally
made the crew walk
around backwards on set
and memorize their
lines in reverse.
And that's because we're in the
dark realm, and everything is--
>>WEIDNER:
Everything's reversed.
>>DYER: --inverted.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
>>DYER: And that's kind of that
principle behind the dark side
of the occult.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, and
I think that's why
he made Cooper so pure.
Because he had to
show the reverse,
and the reverse was
going to be so shocking--
>>DYER: Extreme, yeah.
>>WEIDNER: --that everyone
would fall in love with the idea
that this reversal is
inevitable in our existence.
>>DYER: Now we've talked a lot
about predictive programming.
And what's so amazing in this
next sequence, that I think
has mystified a lot of
people, is how, 25 years ago,
would the conclusion
of the show have
known that the show would
be back in 25 years?
And that's what Laura Palmer
whispers to Cooper in the Black
Lodge.
>>WEIDNER: See you in 25 years.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'll see you
again in 25 years.
Meanwhile--
>>DYER: So what we just saw
was Cooper finally figuring out
what's going on.
>>WEIDNER: Right.
>>DYER: Laura's spirit has been
trapped in this Black Lodge.
And she's prisoner to this
demon, this little midget
Man from Another Place, right?
The bad part of all
this, the worst aspect,
is that Laura is
molested by her father.
And the reason that happened
was that her father Leland
was possessed by Bob.
>>WEIDNER: Right.
>>DYER: So when Leland
dies, Bob's spirit
that's possessing him then
moves on to Windom Earle,
and then causes Windom Earle
to commit all these murders.
>>WEIDNER: Right.
>>DYER: By the end of
the series, what happens
is Cooper ends up trapped
in that same Black Lodge
with Laura Palmer.
And so because this is happening
outside of time and space,
Laura Palmer's telling Cooper,
I'll see you again in 25 years.
And it almost makes us wonder
if David Lynch didn't know then
that the show would come
back 25 years later.
>>WEIDNER: It does
make you think that.
And he knew that what's so
frustrating about the final
of "Twin Peaks" is
that you've fallen
in love with these
characters and everything,
and then it just
slams down on you,
and you're left
bereft, essentially.
Like, what the
hell just happened?
>>DYER: No happy ending here.
>>WEIDNER: No happy ending.
And you're left to
wonder why he did it.
Now he knew the show was
going to be canceled.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: So none of
that's an accident.
So him writing
this 25-year thing,
he had to have known that he
was going to be doing this
in 25 years, that he
was going to pick it
up again in 25 years.
Which really makes you
wonder who David Lynch is.
How could you plan something
25 years ahead, especially
in showbiz?
>>DYER: Right.
So what we're going to
see in the final clip
is something at once esoteric
and absurd and satirical.
So there's aspects of the
movie, "Fire Walk With Me,"
which is based on
the series, that
shows us more about
this Black Lodge
that we didn't really
get in the series.
And what we've
come to understand
is that Bob, that
spirit that's going out
at the behest of the
Man From Another Place--
he's tasked with
bringing back sacrifices
for the Man From Another
Place, this midget guy, right?
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
>>DYER: And it's called
garmanbozia, right?
I always think of like--
it's called creamed corn--
>>WEIDNER: Creamed corn.
>>DYER: --in the series.
And so this spirit, the
demon, eats creamed corn,
which is explained
to be the pain
and suffering of his victims.
And we have this tradition
in a lot of religions
where the idea of consuming
your victim and so forth
gives you their power.
And this demonic entity is
parasitical in that way.
He feeds off of the
pain and suffering
that Laura and the other
victims have exemplified.
So what we're going to
see in this next clip
demonstrates all that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Bob, I want
all my garmonbozia
>>DYER: So it's
all come to a close
and we've discovered that
the town of Twin Peaks
was not just happy America.
There was actually a
cult in the background.
This cult-- the
series explains--
met above a convenience store.
And Laura's dad was involved
in the cult, as well as
other people in the town.
They had a special
magical ring that they
wore to signify their
membership in this cult.
And they were actually
serving a demonic spirit,
whether they knew it or not.
This demonic spirit
was operating
on this other spiritual
plane, but events
that happened in
our world caused
or create significances
or phenomena
in the spiritual plane.
And likewise, the spiritual
plane can influence our plane.
And so to understand this
scene, which really, I think,
kept a lot of people in
the dark for a long time,
all we have to understand
is that this demonic spirit
wants to be fed.
And the way that he feeds
is by this pain and sorrow.
And so he uses
his henchman, Bob,
that he's enslaved
underneath him,
to be his killer, his
predator, to go out on the town
and bring him offerings.
And so the humans in
this series are basically
puppets of these
spiritual forces,
either for good or for evil.
So that's what's going on here.
>>WEIDNER: It goes back to the
gnostic myth of the archons.
And if the archons need to
be fed our pain and sorrow
in order for them to
be full and happy,
and so they create
as much bedlam
as they possibly can in our
society so that they have food.
And essentially, we-- our
emotions, our spiritual being--
is basically being sacrificed
to these dark entities, which
the gnostics absolutely
said were real.
And there's a very close
analogy between the archons
and psychopaths, for instance.
Now psychopaths also kind of eat
your pain and eat your sorrow.
They enjoy inflicting
pain and sorry.
>>DYER: It's psychic vampirism.
>>WEIDNER: Exactly.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: And that's what
he's really talking about here,
and a very, very deep thing.
>>DYER: Yeah.
It reminds me of what we saw
in "Eyes Wide Shut," where
you have the reversing
of the liturgical music,
the religious music,
the mass put in reverse.
And what we have here at the
end of the sequence in "Fire
Walk With Me," where
Laura is shown imprisoned,
is Luigi Cherubini's
"Requiem in C minor,"
which is a liturgical
piece for mass, right?
>>WEIDNER: Right.
>>DYER: So Lynch is,
I think, intentionally
playing this to show that
this is the dark side,
this is a black mass, right?
And the real power
behind that mass
is the sacrifice
of Laura Palmer.
>>WEIDNER: Right, and this is
a war between the two lodges.
And essentially, that's
what the gnostics said,
we were involved
in a spiritual war
here on Earth between
the forces of light
and the forces of darkness.
And Lynch has pretty much
laid it out the way it is.
>>DYER: But what's funny is
that he didn't just lay it out
as this occult story.
He laid it out as
something on the one
hand, a satire of America,
it's also a goofy soap opera.
You're watching
this, and it's just
like, you're laughing
half of the time
that you're seeing the most
absurd dark things, right?
So it's dark satire,
and it's also noir,
and it's all of
these things in one.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, he's
doing a big dance there.
And I don't know how long
he could have kept it up.
Even he probably wondered
at the end how long--
>>DYER: How this on
for two seasons--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>WEIDNER: Exactly.
How it lasted two seasons is a
miracle in America in 1990's.
>>DYER: So you'll notice the
symbolism of the Black Lodge
is interesting,
because you might
think that it would be a Masonic
black and white checkerboard
floor.
But it's not, it's zigzag,
because it's peaks.
It's the good side and
the dark side, of the--
>>WEIDNER: The twin peaks.
>>DYER: --black peak,
the white peak, right?
And you also see this
Saturn imagery there, right?
Next to Cooper, as
you're seeing there,
there's a very prominent
image of Saturn.
And this, again, recalls
that idea of Kronos
who feeds on his children, time.
Time is actually--
>>WEIDNER: Time.
>>DYER: --Kronos
that kills us all.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
>>DYER: It feeds on all of us.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, so how
did Lynch know he'd still
be alive 25 years from then?
He smokes cigarettes.
I mean, it's amazing.
So yeah, the Lodge is
sort of like hell too.
It's red, it's got the strange
quasi-Masonic floors, almost
like he's making fun
of the Masonic floor.
>>DYER: In a way.
>>WEIDNER: And a very
cheap set, by the way.
I mean, he wasn't spending
a whole lot of money
on these curtains.
>>DYER: Yeah, I
wonder a lot of times
if he doesn't do those things
on purpose, it's intentional.
>>WEIDNER: I think he does.
>>DYER: Because we've seen so
many times in this series--
there's a long-running
soap opera
that everybody in
Twin Peaks watches
that's a lot like "Twin Peaks."
So it's kind of
meta-level here, where
we're dealing with layers.
And I think that even his
portrayal of the Black Lodge
is kind of satirical.
It's almost kind
of a joke, right?
>>WEIDNER: I would say so.
It does seem kind of
like a joke, yeah.
>>DYER: I think the takeaway
is that David Lynch wants
us to see that there
are other worlds.
He says this over and
over in interviews.
He's very, very involved in
meditation in his own life.
And he says that
when he meditates,
he goes into the astral realm,
or that deep subconscious
realm from which he
receives the inspiration
for his creative ambience that
nobody else can seem to mimic
perfectly, I don't think.
I mean, it's very unique.
The atmosphere-- people
have this term Lynchian,
that nobody else can recreate.
So what I take away from
it is that that's reality,
that reality is metaphysical.
It's not just the here and
the now, it's not just matter.
It's also other
planes of existence
that are both
positive and negative.
>>WEIDNER: And that's why
he presents it in kind
of a matter of fact way.
And Cooper, who is
obviously David Lynch,
he does the same practices, same
kind of even manner about him.
He even looks a
little bit like him.
He is the epitome of this kind
of caught between these two
worlds, these twin peaks
of duality, of metaphysics,
and physics, and how
we can use metaphysics
to solve physical problems,
and use the physical world
to solve metaphysical problems.
And the whole thing is caught
in this war between the White
Lodge and the Black Lodge, which
again, is very Masonic and very
gnostic.
And I'm wondering where
he's getting a lot of this.
Is it from a dream state
that he's entering?
>>DYER: That's what he says.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah?
That's what it looks like.
>>DYER: I think Lynch is very
influenced by the literary
genre Southern Gothic, and
this would be Flannery O'Connor
or William Faulkner.
And you always have,
in Southern Gothic,
the mix of traditional
religious ideas with something
just completely out of nowhere,
foreign, and often grotesque.
And so this is the idea of
something out of carnivale,
the midget, or the giant, or
somebody extremely overweight,
or something like that.
That's a plot
device, essentially,
in Southern Gothic literature.
And it is grotesque,
it is offensive.
But what the author or the
director is trying to convey
is that reality has these things
that we want to try to avoid.
That is a big part of
life, is the grotesque.
And so Lynch, I think,
is doing the same thing
with putting the
grotesque in our face
to force us to look at the dark
side of these things, right?
But not just the dark side.
I don't want to be overly
negative, because there's
a redemptive aspect to all
this in that Lynch wants
us to laugh at the dark side.
>>WEIDNER: He does.
>>DYER: He wants
us to find humor.
And really, it's a
kind of catharsis.
Aristotle wrote
about the theater,
and why we want to watch
something that's grotesque,
or a horror film, or
something like that,
and it would be so that
we confront our fears.
It's catharsis.
>>WEIDNER: It is.
And it's like watching
a car accident,
you can't take your eyes
off a good horror film.
You're caught in it,
and you're saying,
my god, I don't want to
watch this at all anymore,
but I can't stop watching.
And that's what Lynch is like.
Lynch draws you in with that
music, and the sound effects.
And then he creates
a world where
it's so dreamlike that you're
watching it-- in a way,
you're not remembering it.
Like you forget a dream too.
And the grotesqueries are a
necessary part of this thing,
because what he's trying to
do is say this is reality.
You may look away,
you may not like it,
but this world is not just
lightness and sunshine.
>>DYER: We also have
nightmares, right?
>>WEIDNER: We also
have nightmares.
There is also night
as opposed to day.
There is criminals as
opposed to good people.
And the world is filled with
all of these things, demons
and angels, and all
the contradictions that
duality creates.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: And I think that's
what Lynch is all about.
>>DYER: Absolutely.
Join us next time on
"Hollywood Decoded.
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>WEIDNER: And I'm Jay Weidner.
Thanks for watching.
[MUSIC PLAYING]